# Project Proposal
## Cover/Title page
Project Proposal: Visual Analytic for Sencemaking

## Background and motivation
- definetion of visual analytics and sensemaking

Nowaday, internet has become a key resource for research and information foraging. Applying visualisation into sensemaking has becomes a essential approch for people quickly and smartly anaylise information, especially when using web-based searching doing mulitiple tasks.[] Sensemaking refers to the process by which individuals gather, structure, and represent information, all focused on understanding a specific problem they are trying to solve.[1] 

- traditional way of sensemaking and its visual analytics

Traditionally, online browsers including Chrome and Safari use 'tab management' for user to switch between different tasks. However, this is lack of the functionality for user to handle multitasking and quick information retrieval. For example, dozens of tabs could be displayed once user trying to buy a suitable camera online. This task contains several subtasks including understanding basic component and parameters of a camera and comparing different camers. Users might get lost when browsing such big datasets over long period of exploration and analysis, finding it difficult to navigate back to prior pages or miss understanding some information[].

- previous work and its limitation

Some previous works like SenseMap have proved that visualisation tools enables users to remeber the most relevant knowledge, improve users' understanding of the tasks and guidence for further exploration[]. SenseMapp, developed by Phong H. et al[2], is a google chrome extention which offers an organised and visually appealing tool. In order to help user make well-informed decisions, some previous students' dissertation combine large language model into the tools, which can gethering relavent tabs into a node[]. However, results show that user interface of these tools need greater customization capabilities, allowing users to personalize labels, adjust the layout of nodes and pin pop-up windows[]. Additionally, better way of using language model is advised to improve the accuracy of node suggestion.

- current challenge

With the development of multimodal large model, it is worth to expand upon prevous ideas by trying more complex large models with prompt engineering, and design an all new user interface using different framwork beside google chrome extention interface.


## Aims and Objectives
The aim of this project is to design a web page and a google chrome extention that process user browsing information for imporving the efficiency of web browsing in multipletasking situation. The key objectives of this project are:
- Inverstigate previous methods used to set up the chrome extention with the goal of access user's webpages and sent relevent information to local backend. This include how to efficiently extract both text and images messgaes and how to filer useless information like advertise.
- Bulid a new user interface display user's browsing information and its analysis results, allowing users more intuitively understand the content they are browsing, go to the corresponding history page through interaction and use automatic generate labels or hand makes labels. This interface is different form chrome extention's interface in order to achieve more complex interactions with users.
- Develop a backend combine with multimodal large model, analysis both text and image information sent from chrome extention to improvethe accuracy of tabs grouping and its summerise. This could include the ability to make a summerise of a web page, allowing user to ask question about a concept in a web page and grouping relevent tabs to generate an mindmap.
- Set up an database, store users' browsing history by group of tabs and allow user to share these datas for collabrations.
## Work plan
- Below is a Gannt Chart (generated by Excel) showing the planned project schedule 



## Bibliography
- D. Russell, R. Jeffries and L. Irani, "Sensemaking for the rest of us", CHI workshop on Sensemaking, 2008. 初步定义什么是sencemaking
    - Sensemaking is described as the process in which people collect, organize and create representations of information, all centered around some problem they need to understand
- https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7883515, senseMap的论文，协助用户组织信息并发现信息源
    - sencemaking 可视化类工具对用户的浏览器使用有巨大的提升
    - 部分用户希望添加搜索词功能，指向网站链接
    - 仅仅展示了用户浏览历史，提取的内容信息也仅仅为了展示用户图标，并没有采用LLM多模态分析
- https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1979742.1979570 -- 提出可视化对于sensemaking的重要性
- https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08326#，解释可视化工具对于人类复杂决策的重要性，并提及现有的可视化工具的灵活性之缺乏，需要增加一些算法支持，提高多样性（图片的分析）
- jiaqili的diseertation
    - LLM是可以提升使用体验的
    - 建议添加user lab功能 -- 用户可以自己label




- 还想提一提LLM对sensemaking存在的提升
- 提一提我准备做相关的搜词功能