# Project ideas based on research paper readings (January 2024)

- AI providing some way for the writer to discuss their ideas and develop them further…this is very much like a chatbot application (which has been implemented as well of course before). And it is hard to differentiate this from just straight up interacting with chat GPT.

**Social Dynamics of AI Support in Creative Writing**

- Some design ideas that I could implement (below are quotes taken from the research paper):
    - ‘System designers should consider directing writers’ assumptions about the system by providing context, such that writers are more likely to understand system capabilities correctly. This context could be in the form of **suggesting a mental model to the writer**. A number of caricatures or models of AI writing have been proposed, like thinking of the AI as a ‘deranged but very well-read parrot’ [35] or considering computer-generated text as a kind of automatic writing [27]…context could also come from **giving examples of what a system is and isn’t good at or interface design decisions** (e.g. where computer-generated text is situated in relation to where the writing occurs).’
    - **Design a system that can understand the writer’s intention from the text that the writer inputs.**
        - ‘Intention—what a writing is trying to achieve in their work or why they are pursuing a project—dictates how writers make choices about incorporating suggestions or feedback. At a high level, systems could explicitly ask writers to articulate their goals, and attempt to use this articulation to direct writers to particular features or customize system outputs. At a more low level, systems could add ‘intention’ context to outputs. For instance if a system provides three sentence completion suggestions, and two are visually descriptive and the third includes character ac- tion, these suggestions could be colored according to their intent (namely, adding visual description and furthering the action).’
    - ‘writers worried about reader percep- tion of authenticity, suggesting that **a system that can accurately mimic a writer’s unique style may not create authenticity concerns.’**
    - ‘systems that customize to a writer over time may also result in contributions that feel more like they came from the writer (as the writer contributed, implicitly or explicitly, to customizing the system) versus a generic program.’

**End-to-end Story Plot Generator**

- **I can’t implement this exact solution even if they have provided the code. But there is useful information about how they designed and structured prompts to generate information about premise, characters, etc. from the LLM.**e. “*Moreover, the output of Llama2 focuses more on the age and appearance of the character instead of occupation, experiences, or relationships with other characters (e.g., “Tom is 22 years old and has brown curly hair”). Therefore, we add detailed instructions on generating portraits such as “focusing on relationship between characters, occupation and experience instead of appearance” to ensure the generated portraits contain more useful information about the character.*

**Co-Writing Screenplays and Theatre Scripts with Language Models: Evaluation by Industry Professionals**

- **I can use few shot learning and chain of thought prompting (specific prompt engineering technique examples) to work with an LLM - I can structure my prompts in a similar way when making API calls to GPT-4. But I also need to do take time to test prompts (theirs might not work for me in the same way).**
- I could take the pipeline for plot generation designed (via prompt engineering) in this paper and modify it to apply to novels (which have similar requirements) so that the result isn’t a full screenplay but instead a comprehensive outline that the writer could use to write their book (or generate a storyboard based on the outline).
- Would the goal be to use the LLM to generate the plot (and therefore outline) then generate an storyboard (accompanied with generated images)? And throughout this process there can be some human intervention?
    - I can also provide options to generate more specific information like “architectural details for a fantasy city” and structure prompts for this type of thing.
    - Get the LLM to generate content in your voice and writing style by providing extracts from previous works.
    - **I could find an alternative way to structure the generation (as compared to this paper I mean) - so instead of beginning with a log line, it starts with a handful of characters and their goals/motivations and the obstacles? (And these characters can be used for the image generation as well.) –– Or maybe I have a different starting points for writers to begin at depending on which approach they prefer (i.e. characters or a pitch or worldbuilding) and they can go organically from there to the next step.**
- **The thing that differentiates my project from this paper would be that I’m providing a more user friendly interface for the writer to work with the LLM and also the storyboarding software helps them visualise their story and interact with it in a way that feels more tangible.**
    - I could implement the MVP in Google Colab…..but that would mean I don’t have a meaningful contribution in terms of the interface of the application.
- I could find a way to filter out problematic outputs? That would probably require using RLHF to tune the model to provide more desirable outputs though. Do I need to find an alternative solution?
- **A suggested improvement was for Dramatron to be capable of modelling character relationships – I could find a way to visually display this information to the user in my application**
- **My app could also make it possible to view “alternate narrative structures” – i.e. nonlinear stories, stories that contain multiple POVs, parallel storylines, a frame narrative or story within a story, stream of consciousness/inner monologue**
- “Future Work**: First, one enhancement to improve coherence especially suited for screenplays and theatre scripts would be to generate complete char- acter arcs. Second, generating satisfying scene conclusions in the dialogue generation step could be improved by using hierarchical generation for dialogue: construct each scene’s dialogue from a gen- erated beginning, middle, and end dialogue beat. Third, to improve stylistic coherence, future work could explore methods to generate thematic outputs satisfying notions of genre by rejection sampling, as in [68], writing more stylized prompts, or transposing existing ones into a variety of diverse author styles and voices using large language models.”**
- **“**Many contemporary stories are written to have multiple plot lines which intertwine. But, **there is little work on how to computationally model and generate multiple intersecting plot lines. Complex plot line interaction is a promising avenue of future work** for human-machine co-creativity research in story generation.”
