# Interview with User 3

Q: What is your writing background?

A: I have written a novel, and now I mostly write for tabletop role playing games as a dungeon master.

Q: So you would say that it's if your hobby right or would you be interested in pursuing professionally?

A: No, I am not a professional writer, but I am an active hobbyist.

Q: And what would you say your level of familiarity is with using AI tools during your writing process? Like chat, GPT or maybe an image generation tool.

A: I have not explored many advanced options but I have explored things like if I need a narrative description of a particular scene – if chat GPT can help me with writing that description. I have not explored using it for the functionalities you have suggested yours will include.

Q: Since you've sort of used something like Chat GPT before, what would you say some challenges you've encountered are?

A: With the prompt writing, there can be some difficulties that, for example, if you put a certain word in –  So can I give an example? Is that OK?

Q: Yeah, of course.

A: If I want it to write prayers for a goddess Balance that I have and I'll say, please write me some example prayers for a goddess of Balance named whatever, it will heavily use ‘goddess of Balance’ as a quote and layer the entire prayer with that which doesn’t sound very natural. And it’s not really representative of what you’re trying to do. It’s kind of the same with anything that I try to write – kind of prompts that I give it – it ruins its own style of writing by trying to include key bits that I’ve done. It just feels a bit stilted [referring to the writing generated by the AI]. It’s really frustrating.

Q: Would you say there are any specific types of images or visual styles that you find especially inspiring for your writing?

A: I normally prompt it to do medieval fantasy style painting and that's normally what I lean to. That's quite a typical art style that's used for fantasy paintings, and the same one that you can find on magic the Gathering cards. It's kind of like that art style, and I find it works quite well with kind of fantasy medieval style.

Q: Can you tell me what a typical writing session would look like?

A: Yeah, because obviously there's only so far in advance I can plan the writing for my particular thing that I'm making because it's dependent on other people's actions [referring to Dungeons & Dragons writing]. It tends to be that every time I sit down to write, I need to think about the next thing that is going to happen and then I need to generate the setting, the characters that are going to be involved and world build around particular areas at one time without being able to fully concentrate on the details of other areas – which I guess might differ to other writers.

Q:  So it's more spontaneous and less like pre-planned in advance.

A: Sure.

Q: OK, what about when you were working on your book?

A: Oh, then I write 9:00 to 5:00 every weekday for a year.

Q: Impressive.

A: Not saying they were always productive writing hours, but they were attempted productive writing hours.

Q:  But what would a typical writing session look like in that case? If you can recall, I mean.

A: It was ten years ago. So I wouldn't say I had the best approach to writing. I had kind of loose frameworks for each chapter and then I was kind of trying to get something down on the page for each chapter. So it was kind of just a very rough draft – trying to get those ideas out. And it’s right there AI might have been able to help me out with some blocks that I would come across because I was trying to do stuff so little linearly. If I got a creative block in the middle of a chapter, then that could halt my process for an entire afternoon.

Q: At what stage do you use images and that kind of thing when you're writing either now or in the past when you were working on your book?

A: In the past when I was working, my book AI didn't exist.

Q: No, I mean if you were using like photographs or artwork – stuff you just found online.

A: At the moment I mostly use it for character design – working out design of characters. I would like to use it more for setting images – like you know, you enter a seaside town, what does that seaside town look like?  And being able to generate an image that fits key points that I know about that town - like is it run down or is it quite affluent – and being able to generate something that fits. That would obviously be quite helpful. And I haven't really tested out how good it is at it yet. So for character art, it’s not great. So it’s put me off trying other stuff.

Q: What's a challenge you've encountered with generating character art?

A:  As we've discussed, it is very, very good at creating handsome white men. And very, very overly glamourous women, which for my setting is not particularly helpful because not everyone is wearing a full face of makeup in a medieval village. And even when you try to generate a prisoner or a fisherman, they’re wearing like a mini dress and heavy makeup and it just, it doesn't quite fit. And yeah, I spend a lot of time just trying to prompt the AI to not be using model headshots as it's kind of basis. Every prompt I do, I have to include the word ugly and the images it produces aren't ugly, but they might not be wearing makeup.

Q: Yeah, that is annoying. I remember you were saying about the pirate women you were trying to generate images for.

A: Yeah, I've had to change them to be [a] very attractive pirate crew because I physically couldn't make produce someone ugly. Because it's so early in the world building process, there’s a bunch of chapters they’ll [referring to players in DnD] go through and I don't know exactly what they'll encounter, but I don't want to pay for the subscription to the AI forever. I was like, I'll produce a bunch of images now so that no matter who they come across, I'll have the images. And one of the things I tried to create was people who had disfigurements of some kind – because it's in a pretty harsh fantasy world, there's a chance that people may have been hit in the face with a sword or had an eye clawed out. It [referring to AI] would not produce these features. I tried to [get] people who had bad skin or scars and stuff and it refused to add those on no matter how heavily I weighted that part of the prompt.

Q:  And you've used midjourney, right?

A: I've only used midjourney for images.

Q: After you mentioned that issue with not having characters who are conventionally attractive, I tried to sort of copy the process you were saying and get a ugly character using stable diffusion online and like you said, I couldn't get a character that had a scar on their face.

A: If it does manage to produce someone who's not conventionally attractive, it's almost like a caricature of a person. It's not like a realistic looking person. It'll be like elephant ears and a oversized nose. It will look like a caricature and it won't be usable.

Q: Yeah, that's not helpful then.

A: You have to start weighting it so heavily that it almost forgets what a person looks like, and it defeats the entire purpose.

Q: Would you value a feature that lets you save or export images for later use?

A: Yes. I have that feature on midjourney and I use it every single time I do it. So I would need that to use [this] kind of thing. It would be an unusable app without it for me.

Q: That's good to know because I spoke to someone else who said that they do all of their work online and they don't want to save anything locally whatsoever just because their computer is slow.

A: That makes sense.

Q: How much control would you say you want over the images you generate? Like do you want to extensively customize the characters appearance - I'm guessing you do because you mentioned the scars.

A: I would love to be able to do that. I would love to have an idea for hair color, eye color, they have a scar on their left eye – and if something could produce that level of detail, that would be an irreplaceable service to me.

Q: And is there any other way you can imagine AI could help with developing your story?

A: Specifically in image generation?

Q: Yes.

A: No.

Q:  Do you think it would be helpful to get plot points or dialogue based on generated images?

A: Oh, that could be pretty cool for me specifically. Plot points might be hard because I won't be able to put in enough information to the app for it to be able to generate anything that would be usable. But dialogue could be pretty nice – because obviously I'm not writing set dialogue, I have to do dynamic dialogue in my writing. It’ll be less like quotes given but more like– this could be a phrase they use a lot or they had this particular speech pattern–that would be quite interesting to do. Like they roll their Rs or something. Like [AI] giving me ideas for ways to make them unique and make their dialogue unique.

Q: How important would it be for you to give feedback on the images? As in, would you prefer to do that, or are you someone whose creative flow would get disrupted by using a feature like that?

A: No, for what I use it for, that won’t disrupt my flow.

Q: Do you have any idea for a feedback mechanism that you would like to see?

A: In terms of me giving feedback or the AI giving feedback to me?

Q:  You giving feedback on the generated image – like the quality or whether it's actually helpful.

A: It would be helpful, maybe to tell the AI parts that it’s done correctly. If I say I want a blonde guy with blue eyes [and] a scar on his left eye, and it manages to get the blonde hair and messes up everything else – being able to say [to the AI] OK you did well on the blonde hair, keep that, but everything else, can you redo?

I know one of my friends uses it for her character art because she's a [Dungeons and Dragons] player and she’s made so many images that are very close to her character, Silas. Like it'll get the black hair and the blue eyes correct, or it'll get his nose correct. But she's never managed to get one where every part is correct in the same image. Whereas if she had a feature where she could be like, OK, the hair is right, the eyes are right, the nose is right. Like, just change the chin. Maybe she actually could get one that she's happy with.

Q: Right, because it keeps changing every time it generates right and forgets the previous [output].

A: Yeah, it's not learning based off your happiness of the last image for a lot of them.

## Part 2 – Exercise: Integrating Image Generation into Your Writing Process

Description of my observation of the user - they were asked to think out loud to help me understand their thought process for writing the prompt and the type of images they wanted to generate. Note – Participant was given minimal instruction for using Dream Studio – just a brief description/explanation of the different parameters that can be adjusted and minimal guidance for writing prompts.

Participant said they had not used Dream Studio before.

**Participant was offered two options – to generate an image for a current project or a story idea that they already have. Or to use chat GPT to come up with plot ideas and characters/settings based on those plots. This user chose the first option.**

A: My only problem with is that I’ve only used MidJourney which has very specific command types like you do dash dash no if you want to negatively weight something, dash dash AR if you want to change – I'm guessing none of those will work on this. I don't know how to write a prompt in this style.

Q: From my understanding you can try to write it as prose, essentially like the example they provided.

A: And then you just can’t weight it.

Q: Yeah, I don’t think there is weighting.

A: I'll just have to do it basic.

A: Yeah, I can do something that I might want. Do you want it to be a person or a character?

Q: It's whatever is most useful for you.

A: Normally characters, but I've made all my characters.

Q: Setting is also fine. It's sort of just to see how your thought process would go.

A: There's a character I need to create, called Eve, who is technically a celestial. So she does need to be an attractive woman, but they have gray skin. So I need to make a brunette lady who is very attractive with grey skin and I want her to be muscular. I want her to be a strong woman. She is essentially a female Hercules. Yeah, she's amazing.

[Typing into the prompt field] So human woman, grey skin, muscular, brunette, and then normally I would have fantasy painting at the end because that would make the style be more fantasy painting rather than trying to make a photo.

Q: There's also a style option above the prompt field that might have what you're looking for.

A: [Clicks on fantasy art] That does not look…I'm concerned that’s going to make unrealistic ones now. Because I want it to look like an oil painting and I don’t think they have that. [Scrolling through the style options.] Maybe digital art will get closest. They have a lot of either heavily unrealistic or photographic it turns out.

A: What would I want to avoid? [Looking at the negative prompt field.] This is what is hard to say, right? Because it's hard to know what to avoid until you've seen what it generates, and then you go, oh, wait, that's not what I wanted at all.

I tried to make a freckled man. I only got women. That was all I got. It was a ginger, freckled man for a character, and I think because I wanted him to wear a scarf because he has a scarf that his mum gave him, it only generated women and so I had to be like negative prompt –no female please. Stop trying to make him a girl, he’s a dude.

[Clicks on the Dream button to generate images]

A: This is what I would do as a first thing and then normally see what it gives.

A: Muscles are inappropriate is what we've discovered. Because there is nothing on there that should generate inappropriate images. But I think two of my images have been flagged as appropriate. [Checks advanced settings.] Yeah, I don’t think these would help me now.

Q: Does this happen often?

A: It did happen once when I was trying to generate Eve’s counterpart Adam who is a male version of this [gestures at screen]. Because I was using muscular barbarian, I think it was using a lot of topless images as it's learning thing because obviously a lot of muscular guys post with pictures about their tops off and that was flagging [in] midjourney and [they] have nudity rules. And I imagine the same thing is happening. It’s looking for muscles and finding a lot of things it flags as appropriate because they're shirtless men. I actually have no idea.

She looks like she's wearing a shirt and trousers.

Q: She's probably wearing a sports bra, right?

A: Exactly. It might think it's in lingerie. It’s just bad AI.

Q: So the model thinks it's sexual, even though it's not.

A: Yeah.

A: It does make her look like a superhero in this one. [Referring to the second image in the first batch of generated images.] I feel like this has been based off…

Q: Is this close to what you were imagining or?

A: We'll see. Can I prompt again? [Clicks to generate more images] Ok it does keep the other ones. [Referring to how you can still view the previous batch of images and corresponding prompt.]

A: I think because normally I put a fantasy painting at the end, it knows the kind of character I'm trying to create as being not a gym instructor. So that’s just what I’m used to. [Looking at second batch of images] Are these all blurred?

Q: Why is it coming out blurred? Actually, this hasn't happened before.

A: Also notice none of them have grey skin, by the way. And just because I'm insanely curious, does removing muscular make them more appropriate? Or is it something else that’s [responsible]?

A: Apparently mines just blurry.

Q: Maybe if you try refreshing the page? I'm actually not sure if there's something up with the website because this hasn't happened before.

A: [Refreshes page but images are still blurry.] I also haven't been charged for any of these images apart from these two. From the looks of it, because I have 25 [credits].

Q: It's sort of refusing to provide you the image.

A: When really, I'm not asking for much. I'm asking for a grey skinned woman.

Q: Normally, I’d ask you what precisely you’re looking for that could be changed.

A: OK, so let's focus on these two wonderful images that I produced. [Looks at the two images in the first batch which weren’t blurred/flagged.]

So yeah, what was my prompt for this one? [Looking at the second batch of images.] Just adding medieval gave her armour, but she's still very clearly doesn't have gray skin. [Looks at first batch of images.] Doesn’t have grey skin here. Understandably looks like a gym instructor because I didn't have the fantasy painting or the medieval [keywords] which is kind of my fault because obviously I was using style instead of using it in the prompt. But still very much missing the gray skin which was the fundamental feature I was after. An attractive woman with Gray skin – otherwise, she's just a human. Maybe if I remove human. [Deletes the word human from the prompt field and generates images.]

A: Still no Gray skin. So it’s not the human factor. Now she looks like she might be a nun.

Q: So it's actually getting further and further away from your vision, so to speak.

A: Yeah, this would be great if she was wearing maybe something a bit more medievally and had Gray skin. [Referring to the visible images in the first batch generated.] She looks strong. She’s great. But it’s missing that very key point that she needs to have grey skin.

Q: I think actually those other images are all being flagged and that's why they're coming out blurred.

A:  Which is very confusing because I don't know how this is appropriate. I don't know what part in that unblurred would be an inappropriate image. [Referring to the fourth batch of images.] She looks like a nun.

Q: It could be maybe the skin keyword is confusing the model, but that's bizarre.

A: So you're not allowed to mention skin?

Q: Yeah, that's the thing - because it's pretty innocuous, you would think.

A: Yeah if I want a creature that has Gray skin, it's really hard to say that without skin. Because if I put grey, chances are it's going to give me grey and brunette hair.

Q: Do you think if you put fantasy painting in the prompt field…?

A: I can try actually putting fantasy painting because that would be my usual process. [Looking at prompt] Do I have to change this to female like as woman too human centric?

A: It's actually refusing [to show the image] and she very much does not have Gray skin. She has grey clothes every time. And so ‘muscular medieval’ [keywords] gave me grey armour, removing the ‘muscular’ put her in very much commoners– noble clothes. Removing human didn't seem to do anything to the prompt that we can see and then adding fantasy painting might have changed the style, but it didn't give a Gray skin like we were hoping for sure.

Q: Would you ever try copy pasting text directly from the work you're writing into the prompt field?

A: I have found that that does not generate good images. I need to be quite specific in weighting stuff, but something that could help me to change stuff – to take a piece of text being like, ‘oh I've described this woman, now I want to make a prompt that will generate her’ and it would actually help me make that would be helpful. I don't know how it is on other Ais but on midjourney, the first words you use are more heavily weighted than the last words you used and it doesn't acknowledge commas or any punctuation at all, and if you have separate concepts…so if you want a woman who's holding a rabbit rather than a rabbit woman hybrid, you need to put two semicolons between [them] and say women, and then separately a rabbit. Or, like cheesecake – if you want cheese next to a cake, you would need to make them separate things. If you put them as one word, it might give you a cheesecake. So it's hard to use prose to make prompts in midjourney anyway, on that basis.

Q: So you’ve essentially had to memorize some very complex rules to get anywhere close to the output you want.

A: Oh yeah there's pages and pages of documentation I had to read. It was horrible and I still don't get what I want. Look they still don't have Gray skin!

Q: That just doesn't sound too user friendly.

A: I don't think AI is quite there yet.

Q: Would you say any elements in the images kind of sparked new ideas at all or probably not really?

A: In the nicest way possible, the blurs don’t inspire creativity. It’s a shame, I really like this if she wasn’t wearing a spandex spacesuit, she looked great, but I can't be like ‘this is cool, give me something like this but in armour.’ [Referring to first batch of images] That’s just not a functionality that exists so I've got to basically completely ditch this entire thing and start from scratch again, because it's missing key elements. I can’t carry over stuff its done correctly.

Q: How would you usually incorporate the images into the writing process? You're just going to use them for the description, right?

A: Description, yeah. And for me, obviously with the type of writing that I do, I can actually show the people [referring to dungeons and dragons players] who are essentially experiencing the narrative so that they can then get an image in their head, but [that’s] slightly different to a writing a novel, I guess.

Q: What were some things you liked about using this tool? I know it's been frustrating for you – unexpectedly because this really doesn't happen…

A: I'm really struggling. It did make muscular woman. I guess that is a bonus cause I've had to really weight midjourney for them to give women muscles. And this one got it pretty quick. They're like, yeah, muscles, we can put that on a woman, that’s fine.  This particular one was pretty good there. Everything else it kind of failed out, but that one was nice.

Q: OK, the things you disliked – I'm guessing the fact that it didn't understand your prompt at all.

A: Yeah, the fact that it's tagged a woman in apparently armour as being inappropriate – not going to give that pass. And the fact that the key thing that I wanted can't be generated seemingly at least in an easy manner. I would have to then go really tweak it, go into advanced settings presumably and really heavily try and get this Gray skin. Whereas considering there's not that many words in the prompt –  6 words – and the fact it's just ignoring two of them is a bit underwhelming.

Q: With advanced settings – was there a reason you chose not to go into that? Is it just too much effort or just seemed unnecessary?

A: I feel like maybe my experience is a bit biased because normally I see what it generates without the advanced settings and then go into advanced settings, but unfortunately none of the images was generated so…it doesn't seem like it would have helped with my main issue. Except maybe prompt strength. It’s also not well explained if I’m being totally honest.  [Referring to the advanced settings.] Prompt strength – it doesn’t really tell me how it works. From this, I wouldn’t know how to use it to generate what I want from prompt strength.

In midjourney, you have to put colon colon and then a 2, if you want it weighted twice as much as a one and you have to read advanced documentation to get that. I would have to go read the documentation to work out what I’m meant to do with this [Dreamstudio] to get what I want. I couldn’t just use it [referring to Dream Studio].

Q: That's good to know because I was just thinking whether I need to include more information like that if I'm designing a similar interface. Did you find it easy to translate your idea into the prompt?

A: Yeah, but I didn't get what I wanted from it.

Q: Are there any other ways you think the tool needs to be improved to better suit your creative needs?

A: It's really failing on the fundamentals, which is tough. I like this [waves cursor over the prompt and negative prompt fields]. I like that there's a positive and a negative [prompt] to make it simple. And yeah, upload image is pretty self explanatory. None of this is very well explained, I think. [Referring to the advanced settings section.] If you were new – if you weren’t a computer scientist – new to AI generation, trying to work out prompt strength and seed might be tough. Or really knowing how generation steps really affects it. What is the default – how will changing that to 100 really affect it – what’s it going to do? I wouldn’t be able to tell. I'd have to spend money on this thing to work it out essentially. Otherwise, yeah, just generating actual images I can see would be a good improvement.

Q: Would you prefer to use a website, desktop application, browser extension or some other form of image generation application so that it doesn't disrupt your workflow?

A: Do you know how Midjourney works? You don't have to use a web app for it.

Q: Ohh, you said it's in discord, right?

A: Yeah, so there's a discord bot that you can speak to privately on messages, and you just give it a ton of prompts and then you can come back later and it will have those prompts, and they're saved in a private history for you in the same app that I would be using for a lot of other stuff (for talking to people and stuff). So that's helpful for me. I think it's not so much that it's in discord, but just the fact that I can queue a bunch of prompts up and then leave and come back – that is the most helpful for that. Whereas with this, as far as I can see, I would have to one by one, wait for it to generate an image… generate a new image and see what's happening.

Yeah, a web app. I think if it's not part of a standard app like discord or something – integrated in something I already use – then website would be best. I don't want to download a whole new app for it ideally.

A; Sorry about the images, I didn't think I chose something controversial, but apparently I did.

Q: That this is actually good to know though, because I didn't know that images like this could be flagged at all.

A: Just gonna test…[used cat as the prompt keyword to check whether Dreamstudio will generate images for it]. I can't think of a reason why cat would be flagged. It could just be the websites’ broken.

A: We’ve confirmed it was flagged. It will generate cat, so it is literally a medieval woman with Gray skin, brunette in a fantasy painting style was what I was trying to do and it gave me inappropriate images. Super helpful stuff.

Q: You actually the ideal user for stress testing a system.

A: Accidentally, yeah. When I put in muscular, I thought oh maybe because I have had problems with that before with the men because it will try to use topless men and suddenly it will be like we can't show you this because the man's not wearing a shirt. And I'm like, well, generate him with a shirt. But these people are wearing armour. They're very clearly wearing clothes. I've taken out the muscular and this is literally just - it's a very, very basic prompt for it to be blocking. This looks like Joan of Arc and she's blurred out.

Q: Well, I guess it's good to know the limitations of this particular tool.

Note: Participant added later that they are looking to generate artwork similar to the art found in [this reddit forum](https://www.reddit.com/r/ReasonableFantasy/) (r/reasonablefantasy).
