# Thematic analysis of user interviews

## Interview with User #1

### **Summary of responses**

- A poet of 10 years, working on a novel.
- Writes narrative poetry (mostly realistic, sometimes fantasy) based on memories and realistic literary fiction (novel)
- Storyboarding useful for plotting realistic literary fiction
- Useful to have more ideas at the planning stage/beginning of writing process
- Haven’t used AI at all – not even chat GPT or any image generation tools before
- Preferred imagery/visual style is magical realism in art or surrealist art – the addition of fantastical elements to a real world setting => this is inspiring – i.e. Persistence of Memory by Salvador Dali
- Objects and colours in image determine tone and mood => this would be correlated with the writing that results from that
- Typical writing session for narrative poetry involves using their own photography – their writing is dependent on their memory of the event and the setting in the photograph.
    - Not only are the image and tone important, the photo also has to feel real to them.
    - If they use images generated by AI or photos taken by someone else, their process involves associating the images with their own memories and creating a personal connection to them. Then extrapolating the scene or characters or objects that were in the photograph.
    - They describe what they see in the image and link it back to their own memories, feelings, opinions of things in the image.
- Writing process for their novel: it’s based in the corporate world (in Canada) and they find images of settings from corporate America useful – i.e. office buildings, places where meetings take place, networking events, restaurants, etc. They can’t remember being in those settings so can’t rely on their own memory. AI can help them situate their characters in those settings.
    - The setting images can be a reference or it can be used a starting point for recalling their own memories/experiences of corporate settings.
- Mid to high level control over generated images – for objects and for the setting – i.e. appetizers at a networking event would be helpful to have in the image.
- Wants to focus on adjusting setting details – setting is the priority
- Not sure about using AI for plot or using images to trigger plot ideas
- Regarding AI suggesting dialogue – they are unsure if AI can imitate specific conversations for certain scenarios but talking points – i.e. networking event – would be helpful.
    - Unimportant filler dialogue from the AI would be useful (to accompany the image) – i.e. small talk or introductions which is generic to the scenario and setting. It would also remind them to put those things in their book.
- Not interested in providing feedback on generated images. Prefer feedback feature which is less intrusive and optional.
- Observations from participant using DreamStudio to generate images
    - They entered a prompt to generate an image for their current writing project.
    - They entered ‘men’ for the negative prompt but they were annoyed that the images still included men in the background.
    - They adjusted the style setting to see how that might affect the output.
    - Used keywords to generate the kind of image that they’re looking for in the third batch.
- Want to use AI for side characters to ensure they don’t base their characters on people they know in real life and describe their appearance.
- Would not want to copy paste text directly from their writing into prompt field because then AI will be using their work which they have copyright over.
- Their goal was to generate images that replicate their own experience of the settings and scenarios in the corporate world – the images they got were close but they think they were missing specific keywords that would have improved the accuracy of the images. The people in the images can also be side characters in their book.
- Elements of the images that sparked inspiration are the characters, foods and objects which can be used in their writing.
- Things they liked about using DreamStudio: the negative prompt, different styles for the images (realistic setting was most useful since their story is realistic fiction).
    - Opted not to use advanced settings because the images were sufficient and they didn’t think it was necessary to go into depth.
- Things they disliked about using DreamStudio: some keywords in the prompt (i.e. nametags) are more prominent in the images and were emphasized more than they intended. They wanted the keywords to be combined and result in a more cohesive image. Could not understand why some of the keywords were weighted more.
- Knew what kind of image they wanted and got close to it but believes the limitations in their vocabulary and the keywords they used is the reason for not getting precisely the output they wanted.
- Useful to have a prompt suggestions feature where the AI recommends keywords for the prompt (or rephrases the prompt to make it more effective)
- Using this tool is dependent on how easy it is to generate images vs finding images on Google image search (since they write realistic fiction). Seems like more effort to generate images with AI compared to finding images on Google without trying. This is dependent on the specific setting they want the image for.
- More useful to have image generation for fantasy writing where they can use images as the starting point.
- Prefers using a website – can access from anywhere, can login, would be useful to save images in folders. Two priorities are being able to make an account and manage/organise image from wherever you are.
- Issue with desktop application is their laptop is old/slow. Also memory and storage are concerns when downloading applications from Internet.
- All writing done on Google docs so they don’t really use desktop applications that often. Prefer google docs to organise and access work. So it is unlikely they would export images from an image generation application because they keep everything online.
- Find words more inspiring than images
- Recommends using Pinterest as a reference for creating a moodboard – suggested adding a feature that lets you make a moodboard for images related to one project. And also include captions for these images.

## 

## Analysing the responses

**Pain points in using image generation tool**

- (Unequal) weighting of keywords in the prompt (and not having a way to adjust this) – wanted more cohesive images
- Negative prompt didn’t prevent certain things (i.e. men) from being included in image
- Could take more effort to generate realistic images than to find them with Google image search
- Issue with a desktop application is their laptop is old/slow. Also memory and storage are concerns when downloading applications from Internet.

**Suggested features for application**

- Require mid to high level control over generated images – adjusting setting details is the priority (i.e. objects in the setting)
- Generic filler dialogue to accompany image – like small talk at a networking event
- Not interested in providing feedback on generated images. Prefer feedback feature which is less intrusive and optional.
- Prompt suggestions – keyword recommendations
- Don’t really need advanced settings
- Don’t need to export images
- Build as a website – accessible from everywhere, can login, would be useful to save images in folders. Two priorities are being able to make an account and manage/organise image from wherever you are.
- Ability to make a moodboard for images related to one project
- Include captions for images
- Useful features from DreamStudio - Negative prompt, different styles for images

**Ways that AI generated art can be helpful**

- Need things that help with idea generation at the planning stage of writing process
- Need realistic images of corporate settings for novel – helps situate characters in those situations. Setting images are references or starting point for recalling own memories/experiences.
- Likes using AI to produce secondary/supporting characters to ensure they don’t base characters on real life people

**Other comments**

- Preferred art style = surrealist, magical realism, fantasy elements in realistic setting
- Tone and mood of image will influence the writing
- Need to form personal connection to image to use it in writing

## Interview with User #2

### **Summary of responses**

- Got interested in writing in school – mainly surrealist poetry, fiction (horror, mystery thriller)
- Pursuing writing as a hobby
- Uses chat GPT for writing prompts to deal with writer’s block – i.e. Entered ‘can you give me a short story idea for a horror story set in rural South India’ into chat GPT
- Has some familiarity with AI – used chat GPT, played around with image generation (i.e. used the prompt ‘paint a surreal painting of the Taj Mahal’) but haven’t used it for story writing specifically
- Preferred art style = surrealist imagery for writing horror, more realistic settings (i.e. beach, farm) for poetry
- Limitations in past AI usage – prompt engineering and refining prompts to have more specificity (i.e. specifying that they don’t want extra windows or chimneys in a haunted mansion)
- Images need to match tone/mood of the story or genre – i.e. no colorful setting for horror story
- Writing process – begins with some notes about an story idea (i.e. horror story set in south India - set in an small village in the hills of South India...involves this character, this history) and then builds character then starts writing the story itself. Builds on the original plan as they write.
- Would use images at beginning of writing process to get inspired for the setting and then also while writing
- Saving and exporting images is useful
- Creating folders in the app to store images is useful
- Seeing the prompting history – prompt-image pairs – is helpful, would let you improve prompts to get better images
- Wants some degree of control over the specifications for the character
- Also likes randomness/spontaneity of the AI – can get inspired by good quality randomly generated images and base characters on that
- Suggests having a bar where you can select how much randomness you want in the generated image – so it’s more flexible
- Uses image as a writing prompt essentially
- Not a necessity to have this feature but could be interesting to have captions or descriptions alongside the generated image
- Wants feature to provide feedback to decrease errors/improve image quality during future usage of the application
- Feedback mechanism could be rating system out of 10 and optional space for user to explain why they gave that rating
- DreamStudio image generation exercise:
    - Generated an image for a horror story idea and a Sherlock Holmes type character for a crime/mystery story
    - Opted not to adjust the generation steps number to avoid taxing the system – but also not sure how this works exactly
    - Image gave a feel for the setting.
    - Liked the quality of the images but the AI messed up the limbs for one of the characters
- Noted that slow Internet might affect how long the image generation takes
- Can wait for a bit of time to get the image but they have used image generation websites that take too long and this is not ideal
- Haven’t copy pasted text directly from story/writing into the prompt field before – might do this for a really specific character.
- Thinks using the right or different keywords would have resulted in more relevant images but still satisfied with the output they got
- Images are scene inspiration + reference points (i.e. haunted mansion)
- Thinks that randomness of AI is also why some mistakes were made – with characters’ limbs – but also likes this aspect of using AI
- Likes that you can randomly use a prompt to make a new character and this could produce a new idea
- Not sure how much to specify when using the negative prompt parameter – i.e. how many pillars, windows, etc. It isn’t annoying but takes more effort.
- Didn’t find it difficult to translate ideas into prompts
- Didn’t find it necessary to use advanced settings
- Instead of having a tutorial, can have text show up when the user hovers over a button and this information is there for each aspect of the tool. Or a series of prompts that pop up when you start using the app/website to explain how different features work. (Note: This is similar to how DreamStudio UI is designed.)
- Useful to be able to choose the image style
- Images = great visual aid
- Primarily used websites for image generation – prefers a website which lets you login.
- Desktop application lets you open it immediately

## Analysing the responses

**Pain points in using AI**

- Limitations in past AI usage – prompt engineering and refining prompts to have more specificity (i.e. specifying that they don’t want extra windows or chimneys in a haunted mansion)
- AI messed up the limbs for one of the characters in one of the generated images
- Didn’t like image generation websites that take too long to produce image
- Slow Internet might also affect how long the image generation takes
- Opted not to adjust the generation steps number to avoid taxing the system – but also not sure how this works exactly
- Not sure how much to specify when using the negative prompt parameter – i.e. how many pillars, windows, etc. It isn’t annoying but takes more effort.
- Thinks using the right or different keywords would have resulted in more relevant images

**Suggested features for application**

- Images need to match tone/mood of the story or genre – i.e. no colorful setting for horror story
- Saving and exporting images is useful
- Creating folders in the app to store images is useful
- Seeing the prompting history – prompt-image pairs – is helpful, would let you improve prompts to get better images
- Wants some degree of control over the specifications for the character
- Suggests having a bar where you can select how much randomness you want in the generated image – so it’s more flexible
- Not a necessity to have this feature but could be interesting to have captions or descriptions alongside the generated image
- Feedback mechanism could be rating system out of 10 and optional space for user to explain why they gave that rating
- Haven’t copy pasted text directly from story/writing into the prompt field before – might do this for a really specific character.
- Instead of having a tutorial, can have text show up when the user hovers over a button and this information is there for each aspect of the tool. Or a series of prompts that pop up when you start using the app/website to explain how different features work. (Note: This is similar to how DreamStudio UI is designed.)
- Useful to be able to choose the image style
- Primarily used websites for image generation – prefers a website which lets you login.

**Ways that AI can be helpful**

- Uses chat GPT for writing prompts to deal with writer’s block
- Images are scene inspiration + reference points (i.e. haunted mansion)
    - Would use images at beginning of writing process to get inspired for the setting and then also while writing

**Other comments**

- Preferred art style = surrealist imagery for writing horror, more realistic settings (i.e. beach, farm) for poetry
- Didn’t find it difficult to translate ideas into prompts
- Didn’t find it necessary to use advanced settings

## Interview with User #3

**Summary of responses**

- Has written a novel and writes for tabletop role playing games as a dungeon master. Considers themself an active hobbyist.
- Haven’t explored advanced options for AI but asked Chat GPT to generate narrative descriptions for scenes.
- Challenge with using Chat GPT is that it overuses certain words or phrases that were provided in the original prompt and the resulting writing that is generated sounds stilted and unnatural.
- Preferred art style is medieval fantasy style painting – i.e. the art on Magic the Gathering cards
- Can’t plan writing for DnD too far in advance. Does setting, characters, and world building for certain areas.
- For writing their book, they had a loose framework for each chapter and then did a rough draft based on that. AI would’ve been helpful here to address creative blocks which halted their progress.
- Images mainly used for character design but would also be helpful for setting. Haven’t had a chance to test AI out for generating setting images.
- Character art that has been generated with AI is not great and it has put them off trying other things.
- AI is great at creating handsome white men or glamorous women but this isn’t helpful because their story takes place in a medieval village. The people in images are often wearing full makeup. They tried to prompt the AI not to use model headshots and also include the word ‘ugly’ in prompts – which doesn’t actually produce ugly images but instead people who aren’t wearing makeup. They also couldn’t create people who have disfigurements, bad skin, or scars – AI wouldn’t produce these features even when they weighted that part of the prompt more heavily. Unconventionally attractive people that are produced also look like caricatures and aren’t realistic looking. Using heavier weights also confuses the AI.
- They’ve used Midjourney for image generation.
- Need to be able to save/export images
- Wants to generate detailed character art that has specific eye color, hair color, etc. – so extensive customization.
- Pointed out that they think they can’t provide enough information in the app to generate usable plot points
- Could be useful to generate ideas for writing unique dialogue – i.e. speech patterns
- Would be helpful to give feedback and tell the AI that it has generated certain aspects of the image correctly (i.e. blonde hair) and specify what aspects of the image should be changed/corrected.
- It’s frustrating that the AI isn’t learning based on how satisfied you are with the previous image – and it means it’s difficult to get an image where all of the details are correct and accurate.

**The image generation exercise:**

- They are unfamiliar with writing prompts for Stable Diffusion/Dreamstudio but have experience with the rules for structuring prompts for Midjourney (i.e. negative weighting keywords).
- Attempted to generate image for a character called Eve who is a muscular attractive woman with grey skin in the style of a fantasy painting.
- Struggled to find a style option (in Dreamstudio) that suited their needs – they stated the style options are either heavily unrealistic or photographic and they want more of an oil painting style.
- Most of the generated (except for two) were flagged as inappropriate – they thought it was because of the muscles or because the AI assumed she’s wearing lingerie. It was unclear why the images were considered inappropriate. Modifying the prompt for subsequent batches of images still resulted in flagged and blurred images. This was quite frustrating.
- None of the characters had grey skin which was the main feature that they wanted in the image. They also wanted the character to have more medieval style clothing but they liked that the character appeared strong/muscular in one of the unflagged images.
- They ran into a similar issue previously where their generated images were flagged in Midjourney because nudity is against the rules – but the images in dreamstudio clearly featured characters who are dressed.
- They avoid copy pasting text directly from their work into the prompt field because this usually doesn’t generate good images. They usually specifically add weights but having a tool that could take a text description and turn it into a prompt would be useful.
- They’ve had to read a lot of documentation to understand how to use Midjourney and it was a ‘horrible’ experience.
- They use the images for description and also to show dungeons and dragons players (who are part of the narrative) the images so they can visualise it better.
- Frustrated that it ignored some of the keywords in the prompt (i.e. grey)
- They usually check what images are generated first before using the advanced settings. Also, the things in the advanced settings (i.e. prompt strength) aren’t explained well and it’s unclear how they work. They said they would need to read documentation to work out how to use Dreamstudio. It’s not clear how altering something like generation steps will affect the image. It would necessitate spending money on the tool to understand how it works.
- Things they liked about Dreamstudio – there’s a positive and negative prompt field.
- An improvement for Dreamstudio would be getting images that aren’t flagged.
- Likes queuing up prompts to generate multiple images in Midjourney (on discord) and returning after some time to view the images. Dreamstudio requires waiting to generate an image one by one.
- A website is ideal for an image generation application – they don’t want to download a whole new app.

## Analysing the responses

**Pain points in using image generation tool**

- Struggled to generate ugly or non-conventionally attractive people with disfigurements, bad skin, or scars.
- AI doesn’t improve images based on how satisfied you are with the previous image so it’s difficult to get an image where all of the details are correct.
- Lots of rules for structuring prompts for tools like Midjourney – need to read a lot of documentation to understand it. Need to spend a lot of time to learn how to write prompts.
- Struggled to find a style option (in Dreamstudio) that suited their needs.
- Most of the generated images (except for two) were flagged as inappropriate and it was unclear why the images were considered inappropriate. Modifying the prompt didn’t have any effect.
- Couldn’t generate a character with the skin tone (grey) that they wanted.
- Frustrated that it ignored some of the keywords in the prompt (i.e. grey)
- The features in the advanced settings (i.e. prompt strength and generation steps) aren’t explained well so can’t figure out how altering them will affect the image (without reading documentation.)

**Suggested features for application**

- Need to be able to save/export images
- Wants to generate detailed character art that has specific eye color, hair color, etc. – so extensive customization.
- Could be useful to generate ideas for writing unique dialogue – i.e. speech patterns
- Would be helpful to give feedback and tell the AI that it has generated certain aspects of the image correctly (i.e. blonde hair) and specify what aspects of the image should be changed/corrected.
- Having a tool that could take a text description from their work and turn it into a prompt would be useful.
- Likes queuing up prompts to generate multiple images in Midjourney (on discord) and returning after some time to view the images. Dreamstudio requires waiting to generate an image one by one.
- A website is ideal for an image generation application.
- Liked the positive and negative prompt field in Dreamstudio.

**Ways that AI generated art can be helpful**

- Images mainly used for character design but would also be helpful for setting.
- They use the images for description and also to show dungeons and dragons players (who are part of the narrative) the images so they can visualise it better.

**Other comments**

- Preferred art style is medieval fantasy style painting – i.e. the art on Magic the Gathering cards or https://www.reddit.com/r/ReasonableFantasy/
